
Anderson, Robert, later Sir Robert. Born 1841 in Dublin, son of Crown Solicitor, became leading anti-Fenian in Ireland then at Scotland Yard, before displaced to Home Office. Recalled as Assistant Commissioner. Published apocalyptic interpretations of bible. Died 1918.

Andrieux, Louis. Born 1840. Republican lawyer involved in suppression of Lyon Commune then Opportunist deputy. Appointed Prefect of Police in 1880 he served less than two years, later flirting with Boulangism. Senator from 1903, died 1931. Louis Aragon, Dadaist, Communist and founding exponent of Surrealism, his illegitimate son.

Aveling, Eleanor, known as Tussy. Born 1855. Youngest daughter of Karl Marx, secretary to father, and socialist activist in her own right, with SDF, Socialist League and Independent Labour party, she galvanised support for the Haymarket Martyrs. Died by suicide 1898, using Prussic acid supplied by loved Edward Aveling.

Azef, Evno, Born 1869. Recruited by Okhrana while an impoverished student in 1893, made a career as agent and double agent, rising in Socialist Revolutionary party to effective leadership of its Fighting Organization, with role in provoking assassinations. Exposed by Burtsev in 1908. Died Berlin, 1918.

Bakunin, Mikhail Alexandrovich. Born 1814. Russian revolutionary. Involved in 1848 uprising in Paris and 1849 insurrection in Dresden. Escaped Siberian exile in 1861, established Commune in Lyon in 1870, challenged Marx’s dominance of the International, becoming an inspiration to a younger generation of anarchists until his death in 1876.

Berkman, Alexander. Born 1870 in Lithuania, emigrated to US in 1888 where worked as typesetter for Most and became lover of Emma Goldman, before fourteen years imprisonment for attempted assassination of industrialist Frick. Deported to Russia in 1917, left for Germany in 1921 then France, where died in 1936.

Bint, Henri. Ex-officer of the Surete hired as a French agent of the Holy Brotherhood in 1882, the employed by the Paris Okhrana office throughout Rachkovsky’s tenure as its director. A participant in the celebrated raid on the People’s Will Swiss printing works, Charlotte Bullier, honeypot bait, may have been cousin. Would later claim to have hired Golovinski to forge Protocols. After Bolshevik revolution, worked for Cheka.

Bourdin, Martial. Born 1868. French anarchist, lived in America before London Charlotte Street colony, where his sister had married incendiary English anarchist H.B.Samuels. Close to Emile Henry, on 15 February, 1894 he died of wounds in Greenwich Park, when a bomb he was carrying accidentally exploded.

Brocher, Gustave. Born 1850. Raised as Fourierist, became priest but after Commune went to teach in Russia. In London from 1875 involved with Lavrov’s Vpered! and Most Freiheit, he organised 1881 London anarchist congress, joined Socialist League as anarchist and adopted five orphans of the Commune. Died 1930.

Burtsev, Vladimir. Born 1862. Joined People’s Will following Tsar’s assassination, imprisoned in Peter Paul fortress then active abroad as increasingly prominent militant anti-Tsarist and in counter-intelligence. After imprisonment in Britain, exposed leading Okhrana agents, but opposed Bolsheviks after 1917 revolution. Died 1942.

Cafiero, Carlo. Born 1846 into aristocratic Italian family and known as “Count”, recruited by Marx to convert Italy to the cause but was won over to Bakunin’s vision of anarchistic socialism. Funded Bakunin’s folly of the villa La Baronata as a revolutionary base. Mentally ill from 1882 he lived until 1892 in and out of lunatic asylums. 

Carpenter, Edward. Born 1844. Studied theology at Cambridge, discovered his homosexuality, gave up the cloth taught in working communities, settling on smallholding at Millthorpe near Sheffield. Leading socialist figure and campaigner against discrimination for sexual orientation. Died 1929.

Caserio, Sante Geronomio. Born 1873 in Italy, lived southern France. Executed 1894 for assassination of President Sadi Carnot.

Chaikovksi, Nikolai. Studied as a mathematician in St Petersburg, where he galvanised circle of radical propagandists in early 1870s. After crisis of faith, returned to England from America to continue propaganda campaign. Later involved in gun running to Russia but later opposed Bolsheviks. 

Charles, Fred, born Fred Charles Slaughter Member of Socialist League, travelled to Zurich in attempt to secure Neve’s release, attended 1889 Paris congress, then resident in Sheffield and Walsall, where involved in bomb plot. Sentenced to ten years in prison. Later worked at Ruskin College, Oxford, and joined Whiteway Community in Cotswolds.

Clemenceau, Georges. Born 1841. Moderate mayor of Montmartre in 1871. Held ministerial posts in 1880s, was compromised in the Panama scandal but pro-Dreyfus as newspaper editor. As Minister of Interior and President of the Council in 1906 repressed strikes; returned to latter position in 1917 after eight years out of government. Died 1929.

Coulon, Auguste. Member of Dublin Socialist League in 1886, moved to London where recruited as informant for Special Branch and possibly other police services. Involved in provoking the Walsall bomb affair, and would later claim to be working for the “International Police.”

Creaghe,  John O’Dwyer, Dr. Born 1841, medical education in Boston, emigrated Buenos Aires in 1874, where a leading anarchist. Returned to Sheffield in 1890 for a year where spread incendiary ideas before returning to Argentina.

Cyon, Elie de. Born 1842. Leading Russian physiologist in St Petersburg, his virulent conservatism outraged students and forced his move to Paris where he was refused position at Sorbonne but naturalised. Broker of international deals for Russia, his French citizenship was revoked for double-dealing with Germany. Died 1912

Czolgosz, Leon. Born 1873. Son of Polish immigrants, worked as rabbit trapper and wire-winder until inspired by Bresci to assassinate President McKinley, executed 1901.

Dave, Victor. Belgian anarchist active in Socialist League and involved in long-standing dispute with Peukert, each holding the other to be a police informant.

Degaev, Sergei Petrovich. Born 1857. Army captain expelled for his radicalism, whose brother had been involved in attempt in Tsar’s life, he betrayed Vera Figner to Colonel Sudeikin, who he subsequently murdered. Lived out his life in America as Alexander Pell, academic mathematician.

Durnovo , Petr Nikolayevich. Born 1845. Russian Director of Police from 1884 to 1893, then briefly Interior Minister from 1905, having served as assistant minister for five years previously.

Encausse, Gerard, latterly known as “Papus”. Born 1865. Assisted Charcot with hypnosis experiments at La Salpetriere while involved in esoteric research, becoming Gnostic Bishop and mystic. Wrote against Witte and Rachkovsky in 1901 as “Niet” and influenced Imperial Russian family against them. Died 1916.

Evalenko. Aleksandr. Volunteered services to Okhrana in Russia and emigrated to New York, where infiltrated Society of Russian Friends as “Sergeyev”, destroying the movement from within. Returned to London to continue work there.
 
Feneon, Felix. Born 1861. Art critic, impresario and anarchist with day job at War Ministry, he championed work of Seurat and Signac, among others, coining term “Neo-Impressionism.” Friend of Emile Henry, charged with concealing explosive material, acquitted at Trial of Thirty. Editor of “Revue Blanche.”

Ferre, Theophile. Born 1846. A militant Blanquist and member of the Montmartre Vigilance Committee during Paris siege, he was elected to a seat on the Commune Council, assisted Rigault with the police and security of the Commune, and signed the orders for the execution of hostages. Excuted by firing squad at Satory, November1871.

Figner, Vera Nikolaevna. Born1852. Returned to Russia in 1875 from medical studies in Zurich, becoming a committed revolutionary and member of the Executive Committee of the People’s Will, involved in plots against Tsar. Attempted to revive the organisation after assassination of Tsar, but betrayed by Degaev and imprisoned in the Schlusselburg Fortress until 1905. Participated in the Jury of Honour in 1908 and, was celebrated in St Petersburg in 1917. Died Moscow during WWII.

Flourens, Emile. Born 1841. Younger brother of Gustave, served as Minister for Foreign Affairs 1886-1888

Flourens, Gustave. Born 1838. Radical journalist and revolutionary adventurer during the Second Empire, active in Cretan rising, led insurrections against Government of National Defence in winter of 1870 and was killed while leading the great sortie towards Versailles in early days of the Commune.

Frey, William. Born Geins, 1839. Mathematical prodigy, in 1867 renounced successful career as geodetic surveyor for communal life in America. Following collapse of colony in Kansas, returned to London to establish a positivist cult. His arguments with Lavrov fascinated émigré nihilists in 1887.

Freycinet, Charles de. Born 1828. Served as Chief of Gambetta’s military cabinet in Tours in 1870. Opportunist republican, he led three ministries in 1880s and early 1890s.

Gallifet, Marquis de. Born 1830. Made his military reputation during 1867 French intervention in Mexico, confirmed by heroism at Sedan. Ruthless Versaillais commander during Bloody Week. Briefly Minister of War, 1899. Died 1909.

Gambetta, Leon. Born 1838. Son of a grocer from Cahors, he was an eloquent republican lawyer in opposition to the Second Empire in the late 1860s. Chosen while Minister of Interior for the Government of National Defence to escape Paris by balloon and organise Tours relief force. Disenchanted by the National but took no part in the Commune and became powerful voice of opposition to MacMahon’s presidency. His long-awaited premiership began in late 1881 but lasted barely two months and he was killed later in 1882 following an accident with a revolver.

Goldman, Emma. Born 1969, in Lithuania. Emigrated to America, 1885, where drawn to anarchism under influence of Johann Most, who encouraged her public speaking. Following imprisonment of lover Alexander Berkman’s imprisonment, she became the leading figure of the anarchist movement in America, frequently courting imprisonment. Deported to Russia, with Berkman, in 1919, she abhorred the Bolshevik Terror, and returned West to live out her days in England and Canada.

Golovinski, Matvei. A family friend of Doestoevsky, he joined the Holy Brotherhood in the early 1880s and subsequently the Okhrana but following exposure by Gorky as an informant he moved to Paris to work as a forger for Rachkovsky, allegedly creating the Protocols of the Elders of Zion. Joined Bolsheviks in 1917, playing an important role in the St Petersburg soviet. 

Grave, Jean. Born 1854. Cobbler by trade, became acting editor of Le Revolte at the invitation of Reclus and made the role his own for thirty years, going on to edit the renamed La Revolte and Temps Nouveaux, and becoming known as the “Pope of the rue Mouffetard” for his opinionated influence. Intermittently imprisoned for his views such as those in  The Dying Society and Anarchy he was acquitted at the Trial of Thirty. Signed the Manifesto of Sixteen. Died 1938

Grousset, Paschal. Born 1844. Editor in Chief of La Marseillaise, became Representative for Foreign Affairs under the Commune, was imprisoned on New Caledonia but escaped with Henri Rochefort. Collaborated with Jules Verne on various novels as “Andre Laurie”, he was elected as a socialist Deputy in 1893, having made educational reform the focus of his study and writing. Died 1909.

Guillaume, James. Born 1844. Teacher by profession and follower of Bakunin, prominent in establishing Jura Federation and St Imier Congress, and Kropotkin’s first point of contact with federalist ideas, though the two later disagreed. Biographer of Bakunin and anarchist historian of the First International. Died 1916.

Hansen, Jules. Born 1829. Well-connected Danish journalist known as “Shrew” or “President” recruited by Rachkovsky to co-ordinate propaganda campaign in Paris. Took French citizenship and appointed Counsellor of Embassy for French diplomatic service, he operated as high-level conduit and fixer.

Harting, Arkady, Baron. Born Abraham Hekkelman. Recruited to the Okhrana while a student in St Petersburg, was adopted by Rachkovsky and sent among émigrés under cover name of Landesen. Contrived 1890 Nihilist bomb plot in France, escaping five year sentence in absentia to re-establish himself as respectable Arkady Harting, later Baron, in Belgium. Later appointed Head of the Foreign Okhrana, but past life exposed in 1909. Disappeared to Belgium under official protection.

Hartmann, Lev Nikolaevich. Born 1950, Archangel, arrested 1876 and released a year later he became member of the Executive Committee of the People’s Will. Fled to France following involvement in bomb attack aimed at Tsar’s train in 1879, arrested in Paris but surreptitiously deported to England. Active abroad as propagandist until death in 1913.

Hekkelmann- cf Harting

Henry, Emile. Born 1872. Raised in exiled communard family, frustrated by academic and career opportunities was drawn by brother into anarchist circles. His intended bombing of Carmaux Mine offices in Paris killed five in Rue des Bons Enfants police station in late 1892; arrested after attack on Café Terminus in early 1894, eloquent at trial, he was executed that May.

Henry, Fortune. Brother of Emile, who introduced him to individualist anarchist circles; moved away from terrorism, founding 

Iagolkovski, Cyprien Philipovich. Deep cover agent of the Paris Okhrana, active in Switzerland, France and Belgium. Would later admit to role in assassination of General Seliverstov, and played key role in Liege bombings as Baron Ungern-Sternberg.

Jenkinson, Edward. Anti-Fenian policeman, ousted Anderson from post to run autonomous unit in Scotland Yard, contriving Jubilee Plot against Queen Victoria. Subsequently sidelined.

Jogand-Pages, Gabriel, used pseudonym Leo Taxil. Born 1854. Ferocious anti-Catholic journalist and hoaxer, expelled from masons for scurrilous attacks on the Pope, he professed to be reconciled with the Church in 1885, turning his fire instead on freemasonry, which he exposed as a satanic cult with supporting forged testimony. 

Kibbalchich, Nikolai Ivanovich. Born 1853, the son of a local priest. Educated in engineering and medicine, he attended lectures by De Cyon. Arrested 1875 for lending peasant a banned book to a peasant and sentenced to two months in prison at the Trial of 193. Became technical explosives expert of the People’s Will, setting aside his groundbreaking interest in jet propulsion.  Arrested in March 1881 for his part in the assassination of Tsar Alexander II he was hanged the following month.

Kletochnikov, Nikolai Vasilievich. Born 1848, he infilitrated the Third Section on behalf of the People’s Will. Arrested I January, 1881, having betrayed Rachkovsky, he was tried in the Trial of the Twenty in 1882 and died in the Peter Paul Fortress the following year.

Kravchinsky. Sergei Mihailovich (cf Stepniak). Born 1851, Already a radical while in Artillery School, resigned his commission in 1871, joining the Chaikovski Circle the following year. Fought in the Balkans against the Turks in 1875-6, then involved in planning of Matese revolt near Naples before arrest. Amnestied in Italy, he returned to Russia where he assassinated General Mezentsev in August, 1878 but escaped, from 1883 resident in London where active in propaganda, founding the Friends of Russian Freedom and the Russian Free Press, and native socialist movement. Killed by a train in 1895.

Kropotkin, Alexander. The closest of Peter Kropotkin’s siblings to him in age, their early correspondence traces development of their political thought, Alexander adhering more closely to the moderate Lavrov. Arrested soon after Peter’s imprisonment, in 1875, after decade in Siberian exile committed suicide shortly before his planned release.

Kropotkin, Peter, Prince. Born 1842. Descendent of he royal Rurik dynasty, led geographical expeditions in Siberia and Arctic, but prioritised political activities over his scientific interests. Escaping imprisonment as a propagandist of the Chaikovski Circle, he fled to Western Europe, where he took a leading role in development and promulgation of anarchist ideas from Switzerland, France and England, despite expulsions and further spells in prison, Developed theories of Mutual Aid and anarchist communism. Opposed Bolshevism following return to Russia in 1917, where he died four years later.

Landesen cf Harting 

Leonard – cf Rachkovsky

Lingg, Louis. Born 1864 in Germany, where experience of economic oppression made him an anarchist, known to Rheinsdorff. Arrived Chicago, 1885, arrested the following year on suspicion of involvement with the Haymarket Bombing and sentenced to death. Beat the gallows by biting down on explosive cartridge.

Littlechild, John. Born 1848. Dolly Williamson’s assistant from 1883, with responsibility for Irish Special Branch, became first head of Special Branch’s in 1888; promoted to Chief Inspector two years later but resigned in 1893 to pursue career as private investigator.

Lombroso, Cesare. Born 1835. Socialist in his youth, later theorist of criminal anthropology and founder of the Italian School of Positivist Criminology, he worked at University of Turin. Asserted that criminal could be identified by atavistic physiology and measurement of craniology; his work appealed to eugenicists.

Lopatin, German. Early member of the Chaikovsky Circle, he resisted Kropotkin joining. The first translator of Marx’s Das Kapital into Russian, he briefly became leader in exile of The People’s Will in 1883 before his arrest and imprisonment in the Schlusselberg Fortress. Emerged after twenty years to sit on Burtsev Jury of Honour.

Lophukin, Alexander. Appointed Director of the Police Department by Plehve in 1892, became Associate Minister of the Interior, but feel from grace. Divulged details of Okhrana agents to Burtsev and was exiled to post in Siberia.

Mace, Gustave-Placide. Head of the Surete from 1879 to 1884, latterly encouraging Bertillon’s methods of scientific detection. 

Malato de Cornet, Charles. Born 1857. Accompanied father, a prominent communard, to New Caledonia. Published The Philosophy of Anarchy in 1889, was close to many individualists such as Martin and Emile Henry, and became secretary to Rochefort in London during the early 1890s and a bridge to the younger anarchists. Later acquitted of involvement with an assassination attempt on the King of Spain, he became one of the signatories of the Manifesto of Sixteen, in support of war with Germany, Died 1938.

Malatesta, Errico. Born 1853. Expelled from medical studies became an acolyte of and emissary for Bakunin, promoting insurrectionary tactics, then an active theorist and propagandist for anarchism, in travels that took in much of Europe, Egypt and North and South America. Resident in London, working in menial jobs, for many years from 1889, he was nevertheless seen as the mastermind of plots worldwide. Returned to Italy 1919, but was under house arrest by fascists for much of the rest of his life. Died 1932

Malon, Benoit. Born 1841. One of the first French members of the International, from its foundation, became mayor of 17e arrondisement in 1870, was elected to the National Assembly and sat on the Commune Council. On returning to France from Swiss exile he joined the French Workers Party. Died 1893.

Melville, William, Born 1850. Moved to London from Ireland at any early age, joined police in 1872, working for Criminal Investigation Department and Special Irish Branch, becoming Superintendant of Special Branch in 1893, when known to anarchists as “Le Vil Melville” for his ruthless policing of them. Later illustrious career in British Intelligence.

Mezentsev, Nikolai Vladimirovich, General. Born 1827. Director of the Third Section of the police from 1876, he was stabbed to death two years later by Kravchinsky.

Morris, William. Born 1834. Designer, author, poet, artist and artistic entrepreneur, he became among the most prominent British socialists in the 1880s in the Social Democratic Federation, before joining the Socialist League and founding Commonweal. Disillusioned by tensions with anarchists he withdrew but remained active, publishing the utopian novel News from Nowhere. 

Michel, Louise. Born 1830. The illegitimate daughter of country gentry, she became a schoolteacher and, following her move to Paris, a socialist, joining the Montmartre Vigilance Committee and cementing her iconic reputation during the Commune. A deportee to New Caledonia she was uncompromising regarding the amnesty, as so much else, and remained a totemic figure in the anarchist movement until her death in 1905.

Most, Johann. Born 1846. Socialist journalist in Austria and Germany and a Marxist member of the Reichstag from 1874, he was forced into exile in London in 1879, where he founded Freiheit. Imprisoned for celebrating the assassination of the Tsar, he arrived in the United States in 1883, becoming the foremost evangelist for violent interpretation of “propaganda by deed”, publishing a handbook on explosives, The Science of Revolutionary Warfare. Many times imprisoned, he died in 1906.

Mowbray, Charles. English anarchist orator, co-editor of Commonweal in 1890s, he appears to have been a police spy.

Nadar, Felix Tournachon. Born 1820. Celebrated photographer, writer and aeronaut.

Nechaev, Sergei Gennadievich. Born 1847, the son of a serf, formed a revolutionary circle as a student in St Petersburg in 1868, faked his own arrest and escape and presented himself to Bakunin in Switzerland. In Russia, he organized the murder of a rival student radical, Ivanov, again fled but was extradited and imprisoned in the Peter Paul Fortress. Made contact with the People’s Will leadership shortly before the assassinated of Alexander II to encourage their plans. Died in prison, 1883.

Neve, Johann. Born 1844, Denmark. Peripatetic from London to Paris to New York for several years, took a key role in organizing the Social Democratic Club in London with Frank Kitz in 1877, and as editor of Most’s Freiheit. Established revolutionary cells in Germany and Switzerland in early 1880s, despite arrest and brief imprisonment, but betrayed by Ruess he spent ten years in terrible prison conditions before dying in 1896.

Nicoll, David. An aesthete in his youth, encouraged into anarchism by veteran John Turner, took a leading role in Commonweal. Imprisoned for incitement, he made many accusations of provocation against colleagues and was shunned for his paranoia, despite accuracy of his claims in defence of Walsall Anarchists and others.

Nordau, Max. Born 1849. Author of “The Conventional Lies of our Civilization” and “Degeneration” he was founder of Zionist movement with Herzl; secret lover of Olga Novikov.

Novikov, Olga, nee Kireev. Russia propagandist deployed in London where her salon boasted Prime Miniser Gladstone and editor W.T.Stead among its member and where she become jokingly known as the “M.P for Russia”. Later operated in Paris too, where friends with Juliette Adam. 

Papus – see Encausse

Parsons, Albert. Born 1848. Having led a militia in Texas against the Klu Klux Klan, moved to Chicago and founded the International Working People’s Association, incurring the hostility of local industrialists. An anarchist, he addressed the Haymarket square Square on 4 May, 1886, was sentenced to death for the bombing, though absent, and hanged in November, 1887. Wife, Lucy Parsons, subsequently became a powerful speaker in the socialist cause. 

Pell – see Degaev

Pinkerton, Allan. Born 1819 in Glasgow. A militant Chartist in the late 1830s he fled Britain for America, becoming Chicago’s first detective. Formed the Pinkerton agency before the civil war, then served as head of the Union’s Intelligence Service before returning to private detective business. Organized strike breaking, and acted against the Molly Maguires in 1870s, and wrote about his exploits. After his death in 1884, his sons continued the business, which assumed an increasingly paramilitary character.

Plekhanov, Georgi Valentinovich. Born 1857. An outspoken participant in the revolutionary movement in `Russian from 1876, twice arrested, he attended the Voronezh Congress but remained a member of the more moderate Land and Liberty faction, opposed to terroristic tactics. Emigrated 1880 and became a leader with Zasulich of the Marxist ‘Emancipation of Labor’ group, aligned with western Social Democrats. A colleague of Lenin, he subsequently sided with the Mensheviks and left Russia in the wake of the October Revolution.

Pain, Olivier. La Marseillaise journalist, he became Grousset’s chief of cabinet in the Commune’s department of Foreign Affairs. Escaped New Caledonia penal colony with Rochefort, for whom he subsequently worked as secretary. As Sudan war correspondent for Figaro, was killed in 1885, allegedly as a spy on the orders of General Gordon.

Parmeggiani, Luigi. Individualist anarchist, prominent expropriator and founder of L’Anonymat group in Paris in the late 1880s, he subsequently operated out of London, where activities roused much suspicion. Subsequently opened an apparently respectable antiquities shop close to the British Museum and sued ex-Inspector Sweeney for libel in 1905.

Perovskaya, Sophia Lvovna. Born 1854. Despised father, the Governor General of St Petersburg, taking an early role in revolutionary agitation from 1872 as a member of the Chaikoski circle. Arrested in 1874, then released, she was acquitted at the Trial of 193 and joined the Executive Committee of the People’s Will. Romantically involved with Zhelyabov , took leading role in planning Tsar’s assassination in 1880 and 1881, for which she want to the gallows with her lover.

Pobedonostsev, Constantin Petrovich. Born 1827. Professor of Civil Law until he became personal tutor to the children of Tsar Nicholas II, acquiring growing influence during the 1870s as a State Councillor and General Procurator of the Holy Synod. A reactionary conservative, confirmed anti-Semite and friend of Dostoevsky, as eminence gris of Alexander III’s reign he quelled mooted reforms, but lost influence under Nicholas II and died in 1907, having survived an attempted assassination six years earlier.

Pouget, Jean-Joseph-Emile. Born 1860. A delegate to the 1881 Anarchist Congress in London, he was arrested with Louise Michel for his role in the Invalides riot, imprisoned for eight years but released in 1886. Founded Pere Peinard  in 1889 was tried in absentia at the Trial of Thirty in 1894. An early and prominent advocate of syndicalism, with Pelloutier, in 1900 he became editor of La Voix du Peuple, the organ of the CGT.

Von Plehve, Vyacheslav Konstantinovich. Born 1946. Director of the Police Department in aftermath of Alexander II’s assassination, a hardline conservative and anti-Semite he rose through government to become Minister of Interior in 1902 but was assassinated by Socialist Revolutionaries two years later.

Rachkovsky, Pyotr. Born 1851. Third Section infiltration agent, member of Holy Brotherhood and later Head of the Foreign Okhrana, based in Paris. The foremost intelligencer of his era, he was finally dismissed in 1902 on the instigation of the Tsarina. Briefly restored to prominence in Russia following 1905 revolution. Died 1910.

Ravachol, born Francois-Claude Koenigstein, 1859. Criminal turned anarchist expropriator, after perpetrating several macabre crimes was impelled to terrorism and carried out mob attack on the Café Very in Very, for which he was executed the following year.

Reclus, Elie. Born 1827.  Older brother of Elisee, whom he accompanied on their early travels. Director of Bibliotheque Nationale during the Commune. Father of Paul he was briefly arrested in 1890s on suspicion of his concealment, but joined Elisee at New University to teach comparative mythology. Died 1904.

Reclus, Elisee. Born 1830. Prominent theorist of anarchism, highly esteemed geographer and author of many books and articles in both areas, of which the greatest achievement was nineteen volume Universal Geography, he remained a active in he cause as speaker and journalist until his death in 1905.
 
Reuss, Theodore. Wagnerian singer, opera impresario and supposed refounder of The Illuminati. Disruptive influence in Socialist League as German police agent, who betrayed Johann Neve to arrest. Later colleague of Encausse as Gnostic bishops.

Richter – cf Rachkovsky

Rigault, Raoul. A teenage radical during the last years of the Second Empire, became Commune’s Chief of Police. A ruthless Jacobin, it was his decision to take hostage the Archbishop of Paris and others; later installed as Procurator of the Revolutionary Tribunal. Killed during Bloody Week, though persistent rumours of his survival .

Rochefort, Victor-Henri, Marquis de Rochefort-Lucay. A civil servant and art dealer in his youth, his polemical journalism and founding of La Lanterne and La Marseillaise placed him among the foremost critics of the Second Empire. Became the most radical figure in the Government of National Defence, but resigned from the National Assembly for its defeatism. Escaped New Caledonia and lived in Swiss exile until 1880, founding and directing L’Intransigeant. Increasingly nationalistic and anti-Semitic in his politics, was among Boulanger’s closest supporters and later a virulent anti-Dreyfusard..Died 1913.

Rublev – see Kravchinsky

Samuels, Henry B. Incendiary member of Socialist League and later co-editor of Commonweal, widely suspected as an agent provocateur following the death of his brother-in-law Martial Bourdin in Greenwich park bomb explosion.

Savinkov, Boris. Born 1879. Expelled from his law studies in 1899 as a radical, he toyed with Marxism while abroad before joining the Socialist-Revolutionary Party and playing an important part in its Fighting Unit alongside Azef, leading the assassination of Plehve and the Grand Duke Sergei. Fled death sentence in 1906 to Paris, writing fiction based on his experiences, before returning shortly after the February Revolution of 1917 to become Deputy War Minister in the Provisional Government. Took prominent role in resistance to Bolshevik rule, was arrested and died in the Lubyanka in 1925.

Seliverstov, General. Ex-Chief of Police in St Petersburg, assassinated in Paris in November 1890.

Sergeyev – see Evalenko

Simon, known as “Biscuit.” Born 1873, Ravachol accomplice in theft of explosives and a series of bombings in Paris during early 1892. Fled to England but was identified and arrested on his return to France, and deported to Devil’s Island in Guyana, where he was hunted down and shot dead after taking part in a rising of prisoners in late 1894.

Stepniak – see Kravchinsky

Stieber, Wilhelm. Born 1818, he began his career as a radical lawyer then joined Prussian police. Innovated many detective techniques, repeatedly schemed against Marx and headed military intelligence during the Franco-Prussian war, whilst continuing to advise the Russian Third Section almost until his death in 1882.

Leo Taxil – cf Jogand-Pages

Thiers, Louise-Adolphe. Born 1797. As a liberal journalist and historian, he helped elevate Louise-Philippe to the throne in 1830, served in his thirties as interior minister, foreign minister and effectively prime minister, but persona non grata under Second Empire. Reemerged in 1870 to lead failed mission to persuade Britain and Russia to intervene to end Germany’s occupation of France. Elected head of the Provisional Government to implement the Armistice, he evacuated to Versailles in the face of radical resistance in Paris, precipitating the Commune, which he subsequently crushed, only to be ousted as provisional President of the Republic in 1873. Died 1877. 

Tikhomirov, Lev Alexandrovich. Born 1850. A member of the Land and Freedom Movement he attended the Liptesk conference and joined the Executive Committee of the People’s Will after the conference at Voronezh. Despite weak nerves, took a prominent propagandist and organizational role in the movement, continuing after his emigration in 1882. Persuaded to recant his beliefs by Rachkovsky in 1888, he returned to Russian to become a virulently conservative journalist. Died 1922.

Ungern-Sternberg – see Iagolkvoski

D’Uzes, Marie-Clementine de Rochechouart-Mortemart (Duchess) Militant royalist and Boulangist, she was a novelist and sculptor. She funded both the Boulangists and anarchists, supplying money to Louise Michel, whose friendship she secured over their charitable interest in the cause of women’s rights.

Vaillant, Auguste. Born 1861. Namesake but no relative of Commune Minister of Education, experience as “peon” labourer in Argentina confirmed anarchist inclinations. Having escaped back to Europe, in November 1893, flung bomb into Chamber of Deputies. Executed February 1894.

Vauvelle, Charlotte. Born 1872. Thirty five years Louise Michel’s junior, she lived with her as her devoted companion for more than a decade until Michel’s death. Brought up with anarchists, butgrew to dislike them. Said to be both an Orleanist agent, who helped bring Michel into the orbit of the Duchesse d’Uzes, and an informant for Special Branch.

Williamson, Adophus “Dolly”. Born 1830. First head of Scotland Yard’s Detective Branch and its successor, the Criminal Investigation Department. Died 1889.

Witte, Sergei Yulyevich, later Count. Born 1849. Worked in management of Russian railways during vast expansion, and may have contributed to formation of Holy Brotherhood in 1881. Finance minister for a decade from 1893, pursued progressive policies; Rachkovsky an ally. Chairman of Committee of Ministers 1903-5 and Council of Ministers until 1906. Died 1915.

Zasulich, Vera Ivanova. Born 1852. When only sixteen was duped into assisting Nechaev and imprisoned for two years and then exiled for a two further years. Returned to Russia to join the revolutionary underground in Kiev. Reacted to Bogoliubov beating she tried to shoot General Trepov but was acquitted by a jury trial and spirited out of the country. In Switzerland, she lodged for a while with Kravchinsky but joined Plekhanov and Lenin in the Social Democratic party, splitting with the latter in 1903. Died 1919.

Zheliabov, Andrei Ivanovich. Born 1850 into a serf family, he joined the Volkhovsky Circle in Odessa following his expulsion from university, and was further radicalised by repeated arrest. Attended Lipetsk and Voronezh conferences, joined the Executive Committee of the People’s Will and took a lead role invarious attempts on the Tsar’s life, up to success of March 1881, though arrested three days earlier. Executed April, 1881.

Zo d’Axa, Alphonse Gallaud de la Pérouse. Born 1864. Deserter from cavalry whose political and journalistic career was marked by its flamboyance and extremism, first as an ultra-Catholic in Italy, then as an anarchist of nihilistic inclinations in France. Founder of L’EnDehors, and friend of individualist anarchists whose terrorism he extolled a tantamount to artistic gestures. 

